feat: Maps page update (#156)
tact-lang/tact-docs: pages/cookbook/index.mdx

## Map

For description and basic usage see [`map<k, v>{:tact}` type in the Book](/book/maps).

> ### How to iterate over map entries

Author: I've added two examples, one with how people do it most often and another with circular buffer (thanks for correcting me here, btw). And so it happens that the general case of traversing maps in Tact is to add a helper variable for tracking the length and so on. I have yet to see an example of someone using the [FunC-way](https://docs.ton.org/develop/func/cookbook#how-to-iterate-dictionaries) in Tact.

So, if that's helpful for end-users, we may add a FunC-way as an another example :)

> ### How to iterate over map entries

Reviewer: "How to iterate over a map" is one of the most frequent questions in the Tact dev chats :) Let's go for the general case in a separate PR

        let i: Int = 0; // declare usual i for loop iterations
        while (i < self.counter) {
           send(SendParameters{
                bounce: false,              // do not bounce back this message
                to: self.record.get(i)!!,   // set the sender address, knowing that key i exists in the map
                value: ton("0.0000001"),    // 100 nanoToncoins (nano-tons)
                mode: SendIgnoreErrors,     // send ignoring errors in transaction, if any
                body: "SENDING".asComment() // String "SENDING" converted to a Cell as a message body
            });
            i += 1; // don't forget to increase the i
        }
    }

    // Getter function for obtaining the value of self.record
    get fun map(): map<Int, Address> {
        return self.record;
    }

    // Getter function for obtaining the value of self.counter
    get fun counter(): Int {
        return self.counter;
    }
}
```

<Callout>

  This example is adapted from [howardpen9/while-example-tact](https://github.com/howardpen9/while-example-tact/blob/de5807fcd20dba5f6a3748d112511477fb22bfcc/contracts/awesome.tact#L19C10-L19C10).

</Callout>

> ### How to make a cyclic array with a map

Author: Yes, thank you for suggesting it!

```tact
import "@stdlib/deploy"; // for Deployable trait

> // This contract records the last 5 timestamps of when "timer" message was received

Author: Fixed

contract Arrays with Deployable {
    // Declare a compile-time constant upper bound for our map representing a buffer
    const MaxBufferSize: Int = 5;

    // Persistent state variables
    buffer: map<Int, Int>; // this is our buffer implemented with a map
    bufferLength: Int as uint8 = 0;

>     bufferStart: Int as uint8 = 0; // current index into the buffer

Reviewer: These variables got renamed, but their usages below still use the old namings

    // Constructor (initialization) function of the contract
    init() {}

>     // Internal function for pushing an item to the end of the array
>     fun arrPush(item: Int) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    // Internal function for adding a new item into the buffer
    fun bufferPush(item: Int) {
```

        if (self.arrLength < self.MaxSize) {
            self.arr.set(self.arrLength, item);

>             self.arrLength = self.arrLength + 1;

Reviewer: let's use `+=` here after we rename things

        } else {
            self.arr.set(self.arrStart, item);
            self.arrStart = (self.arrStart + 1) % self.MaxSize;
        }
    }

    // Iterate over all items in the array and dump them
    fun arrPrint() {
        let i: Int = self.arrStart;
        repeat (self.arrLength) {
            dump(self.arr.get(i)!!); // !! tells the compiler this can't be null

>             i = (i + 1) % self.MaxSize;

Reviewer: this contract won't compile because `MaxSize` is an unknown identifier

Author: Hmm, I'm sure I tested all complete contracts. Maybe I did change the identifiers right at the end though, I'll re-check :)

## Map

For description and basic usage see [`map<k, v>{:tact}` type in the Book](/book/maps).

> ### How to emulate an array using a map

Reviewer: We explain how to do it, but then at the end discourage this recipe and show how this is actually supposed to be done. To me it makes sense to remove this section and show the proper way immediately

Author: My idea was to showcase a transition between straighforward approach with manual management to the version with extension functions and such. Idk if we should disregard the former, though

Author: Oh, and I terribly want to rename that `Array` example into `Stack`, as push/pop are more of a stack thing. It's just JS confused those terms and mixed them together :)

extends mutates fun push(self: Array, item: Int) {
    self.map.set(self.length, item); // set the entry (key-value pair)
    self.length += 1;                // increase the length field
}

// Extension mutation function for deleting the last entry and returning its value
extends mutates fun pop(self: Array): Int {
    require(self.length > 0, "No items in the array to delete!");

    // Note, that we use !! operator as we know for sure that the value would be there
    let lastItem: Int = self.map.get(self.length - 1)!!;
    self.map.set(self.length - 1, null); // delete the entry
    self.length -= 1;                    // decrease the length field

    return lastItem;
}

// Extension function for returning the last value
extends fun getLast(self: Array): Int {
    require(self.length > 0, "No items in the array!");

    // Note, that we use !! operator as we know for sure that the value would be there
    return self.map.get(self.length - 1)!!;
}

contract MapsAsArrays with Deployable {
    // Persistent state variables
    array: Array; // our «array», which uses the map

    // Constructor (initialization) function of the contract
    init() {

>         self.array = Array{map: emptyMap()}; // length defaults to 0

Reviewer: We should define an `emptyArray` constructor: it should look like a map, as if arrays are also builtin.

Author: Ok, will do!

    receive("pop") {
        // Remove the last item and decrease the counter
        self.array.pop();
    }

    // Internal message receiver, which responds to a String message "get_last"
    receive("get_last") {
        // Reply back with the latest item in the map if it exists, or raise an error
        self.reply(self.array.getLast().toCoinsString().asComment());
    }

    // Getter function for obtaining the «array»
    get fun map(): map<Int, Int> {
        return self.array.map;
    }

    // Getter function for obtaining the current length of the «array»
    get fun length(): Int {
        return self.array.length;
    }
}
```

### How to make a circular buffer with a map

```tact
import "@stdlib/deploy"; // for Deployable trait

// This contract records the last 5 timestamps of when "timer" message was received
contract CircularBuffer with Deployable {
    // Declare a compile-time constant upper bound for our map representing a buffer
    const MaxBufferSize: Int = 5;

    // Persistent state variables
    buffer: map<Int, Int>; // this is our buffer implemented with a map
    bufferLength: Int as uint8 = 0;

>     bufferStart: Int as uint8 = 0; // current index into the buffer

Reviewer: I really like the example you did for arrays as maps packed with length + extension functions, looks like we should encourage that coding style for buffers as well (or any other complex data structure with non-trivial operations), let's try refactoring the circular buffer implementation in the same style
